README.md, before:

# Obsidian MCP Server

A Model Context Protocol (MCP) server that provides AI models with access to your Obsidian notes through your existing LiveSync CouchDB setup.

> **Disclaimer:** This MCP server is vibe-coded by Claude, Gemini and me. See the [Product Spec](PRODUCT_SPEC.md) for details. 

## Features

- **Read-only access** to your Obsidian notes via MCP protocol version **2025-03-26**
- **Strict version negotiation** – the server rejects unsupported `protocolVersion` values with JSON-RPC error **−32001** so clients can gracefully fall back.
- **Performance-optimized** resource listing (10 recent notes) with comprehensive search tools
- **Enhanced UX**: Automatic content inclusion for small result sets (≤3 notes) to reduce back-and-forth
- **Seamless integration** with existing Obsidian LiveSync infrastructure
- **Metadata extraction** including frontmatter, tags, and aliases
- **Content reassembly** for chunked notes
- **Handles encrypted vaults** (if `VAULT_PASSPHRASE` is provided)
- **Docker support** for easy deployment
- **Configurable** via environment variables

## Architecture

```
[AI Clients (ChatGPT, Claude)] 
      ↓ (MCP Protocol - stdio/SSE)
[Obsidian MCP Server] 
      ↓ (CouchDB API)
[Your LiveSync CouchDB Instance]
      ↓ (LiveSync Protocol)
[Your Obsidian Vaults]
```

## Prerequisites

- A running Obsidian LiveSync CouchDB instance
- CouchDB credentials with read access to your LiveSync database
- Python 3.10+ (if running locally) or Docker

## Quick Start

### Using Docker (Recommended)

1. **Clone and configure:**
   ```bash
   git clone <this-repo>
   cd obsidian-mcp-server
   cp env.example .env
   ```

2. **Edit `.env` with your settings:**
   ```bash
   COUCHDB_BASE_URL=https://your-couchdb-instance.com/secret-path
   COUCHDB_DATABASE_NAME=your-livesync-db-name
   COUCHDB_USER=your-username
   COUCHDB_PASSWORD=your-password
   ```

3. **Run with Docker Compose:**
   ```bash
   docker-compose up -d
   ```

4. **Test the connection:**
   ```bash
   curl http://localhost:8000/sse
   ```

### Local Development

1. **Install dependencies:**
   ```bash
   pip install -e .
   ```

2. **Set environment variables:**
   ```bash
   export COUCHDB_BASE_URL="https://your-couchdb-instance.com"
   export COUCHDB_DATABASE_NAME="your-db-name"
   export COUCHDB_USER="your-username"
   export COUCHDB_PASSWORD="your-password"
   ```

3. **Run the server:**
   ```bash
   # For stdio transport (direct MCP client connection)
   obsidian-mcp-server --transport stdio
   
   # For SSE transport (HTTP-based)
   obsidian-mcp-server --transport sse --port 8000
   ```

## Setup and Configuration

All configuration is done via environment variables:

| Variable | Required | Default | Description |
|----------|----------|---------|-------------|
| `COUCHDB_BASE_URL` | Yes | - | Full URL to your CouchDB instance |
| `COUCHDB_DATABASE_NAME` | Yes | - | Name of your LiveSync database |
| `COUCHDB_USER` | Yes | - | CouchDB username |
| `COUCHDB_PASSWORD` | Yes | - | CouchDB password |
| `SERVER_PORT` | No | 8000 | Port for SSE transport |
| `USE_PATH_OBFUSCATION` | No | false | Whether LiveSync uses path obfuscation (currently not supported) |
| `VAULT_PASSPHRASE` | No | - | **Optional.** Passphrase for decrypting encrypted Obsidian LiveSync notes. If not set, encrypted notes will not be decrypted. |
| `VAULT_ID` | No | default | Identifier for your vault in URIs |
| `COUCHDB_LIST_LIMIT_FOR_PATH_SEARCH` | No | 500 | Max recent notes to scan when direct path lookup fails or path obfuscation is on. |

### CouchDB URL Format

Your `COUCHDB_BASE_URL` should include any secret paths or authentication prefixes:

- **Direct CouchDB:** `http://localhost:5984`
- **With Caddy proxy:** `https://vault.example.com/secret-path`
- **Self-hosted LiveSync:** `https://your-domain.com/e=your-secret`

### CouchDB Index Creation (Recommended)

To ensure efficient querying of notes, especially for listing and sorting by modification time (`mtime`), it is highly recommended to create a JSON index in your CouchDB LiveSync database. This index helps CouchDB quickly find and sort notes based on their type and modification time.

**Index Definition:**

```json
{
  "index": {
    "fields": ["type", "mtime"]
  },
  "name": "idx-type-mtime-sorted",
  "type": "json"
}
```

**How to Create the Index:**

You can create this index using CouchDB's Fauxton interface or via `curl`.

**Using Fauxton:**
1.  Navigate to your CouchDB instance in your browser (e.g., `http://localhost:5984/_utils/`).
2.  Select your LiveSync database.
3.  Go to "All Documents" -> "New Index" (or similar, depending on Fauxton version; older versions might have it under "Design Documents" -> "New View/Index").
4.  Choose "JSON" as the index type.
5.  Enter the JSON definition above into the editor.
6.  Click "Create Index".

**Using `curl`:**

Replace `YOUR_COUCHDB_URL`, `YOUR_DATABASE_NAME`, `YOUR_USERNAME`, and `YOUR_PASSWORD` with your actual CouchDB details.

```bash
curl -X POST \
  YOUR_COUCHDB_URL/YOUR_DATABASE_NAME/_index \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -u "YOUR_USERNAME:YOUR_PASSWORD" \
  -d '{ \
    "index": { \n      "fields": ["type", "mtime"] \n    }, \n    "name": "idx-type-mtime-sorted", \n    "type": "json" \n  }'
```

**Example with placeholder values:**
```bash
curl -X POST \
  http://localhost:5984/my_livesync_db/_index \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -u "admin:password" \
  -d '{ \
    "index": { \n      "fields": ["type", "mtime"] \n    }, \n    "name": "idx-type-mtime-sorted", \n    "type": "json" \n  }'
```

Creating this index will significantly improve the performance of operations like listing recent notes.

## MCP Client Integration

### Claude Desktop

Add to your Claude Desktop configuration:

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "obsidian": {
      "command": "docker",
      "args": [
        "run", "--rm", "-i",
        "--env-file", "/path/to/your/.env",
        "obsidian-mcp-server",
        "--transport", "stdio"
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

### Custom MCP Client

```python
from mcp import ClientSession
from mcp.client.stdio import stdio_client

# Connect to the server
async with stdio_client() as streams:
    async with ClientSession(streams[0], streams[1]) as session:
        # Initialize the connection
        await session.initialize()
        
        # Get the most recent note with content in one call
        recent_note = await session.call_tool("get_recent_note", {})
        print("Most recent note:", recent_note)
        
        # Search for specific content (auto-includes content for ≤3 results)
        search_results = await session.call_tool("search_notes", {"query": "project", "limit": 3})
        print("Search results with content:", search_results)
        
        # Browse recent notes (auto-includes content for ≤3 results)
        browse_results = await session.call_tool("browse_notes", {"limit": 2})
        print("Recent notes with content:", browse_results)
        
        # List available notes (metadata only, for discovery)
        resources = await session.list_resources()
        
        # Read a specific note if needed
        if resources.resources:
            content = await session.read_resource(resources.resources[0].uri)
            print("Specific note content:", content)
```

## API Reference

The server implements the MCP protocol version **2025-03-26**:

### Resources

#### `resources/list`

Lists up to 10 recent Obsidian notes for performance optimization. For comprehensive note discovery, use the search and browse tools.

**Response:**
```json
{
  "resources": [
    {
      "uri": "mcp-obsidian://vault-id/path/to/note.md",
      "name": "Note Title",
      "description": "Path: path/to/note.md",
      "mimeType": "text/markdown"
    }
  ]
}
```

#### `resources/read`

Reads the content of a specific note.

**Parameters:**
- `uri`: The resource URI from `resources/list` or tool output

**Response:**
```json
{
  "contents": [
    {
      "uri": "mcp-obsidian://vault-id/path/to/note.md",
      "mimeType": "text/markdown",
      "text": "# Note Title\n\nNote content..."
    }
  ]
}
```

### Tools

#### `search_notes`

Search through notes by title, content, or tags with rich metadata and relevance scoring. **Automatically includes full content for small result sets (≤3 notes)** to improve user experience.

**Parameters:**
- `query` (string): Search query (leave empty to browse recent notes)
- `limit` (integer): Maximum results (default: 10, max: 50)
- `include_content` (boolean): Force content inclusion (auto-enabled for ≤3 results)

#### `browse_notes`

Browse recent notes with sorting options. **Automatically includes full content for small result sets (≤3 notes)** to improve user experience.

**Parameters:**
- `limit` (integer): Maximum results (default: 20, max: 50)
- `sort_by` (string): Sort order - "mtime", "ctime", or "path"
- `include_content` (boolean): Force content inclusion (auto-enabled for ≤3 results)

#### `get_recent_note`

Get the most recent note with full content. **Optimized for "show me the latest note" queries** - returns complete note content in a single call.

**Parameters:**
- `sort_by` (string): How to determine "most recent" - "mtime" or "ctime" (default: "mtime")

## Supported Note Features

- ✅ **Frontmatter** - YAML metadata is preserved
- ✅ **Tags** - Both `#hashtags` and frontmatter tags
- ✅ **Aliases** - From frontmatter
- ✅ **Chunked notes** - Automatically reassembled
- ✅ **Markdown content** - Full content with formatting
- ✅ **Encrypted notes** - Decrypted if `VAULT_PASSPHRASE` is set (compatible with `octagonal-wheels`)
- ❌ **Attachments** - Not yet supported
- ❌ **Write operations** - Read-only for safety

## Future Enhancements

- **Custom HTTP API**: Bearer token authentication and custom endpoints for advanced deployment scenarios
- **Write Operations**: Note creation and modification capabilities
- **Real-time Updates**: MCP resource subscriptions and live vault change notifications
- **Advanced Search**: Enhanced querying with date ranges, tag filters, and graph traversal

## Troubleshooting

### Connection Issues

1. **Test CouchDB access:**
   ```bash
   curl -u username:password https://your-couchdb-url/your-database
   ```

2. **Check server logs:**
   ```bash
   docker-compose logs obsidian-mcp-server
   ```

3. **Verify environment variables:**
   ```bash
   docker-compose config
   ```

### Common Problems

- **"Failed to connect to CouchDB"**: Check your URL, credentials, and network access
- **"No notes found"**: Verify your database name and that LiveSync has synced notes
- **"Path obfuscation errors"**: Set `USE_PATH_OBFUSCATION=true` if LiveSync uses it
- **"Decryption failed" or "Content looks encrypted"**: Ensure `VAULT_PASSPHRASE` is correctly set in your `.env` file if your vault uses encryption. If it is set, verify the passphrase is correct. Encrypted content that cannot be decrypted will be marked.

## Security Considerations

- The server provides **read-only** access to your notes
- Use strong API keys and secure your CouchDB credentials
- Consider running behind a reverse proxy with SSL
- Limit network access to the CouchDB instance
- Regularly rotate your API keys

## Development

### Running Tests

```bash
pytest tests/
```

### Code Quality

```bash
ruff check .
pyright .
```

### Building Docker Image

```bash
docker build -t obsidian-mcp-server .
```

## Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch
3. Make your changes
4. Add tests
5. Submit a pull request

## License

MIT License - see LICENSE file for details.

## Related Projects

- [Obsidian LiveSync](https://github.com/vrtmrz/obsidian-livesync)
- [Model Context Protocol](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/)
- [Claude Desktop](https://claude.ai/desktop)

Commit message:

docs: update transport and error handling documentation
- Add HTTP transport details and mark SSE as deprecated

- Add centralized error handling documentation

- Update technology stack to mention asyncio

- Add error code table and descriptions

README.md, after:

# Obsidian MCP Server

A Model Context Protocol (MCP) server that provides AI models with access to your Obsidian notes through your existing LiveSync CouchDB setup.

> **Disclaimer:** This MCP server is vibe-coded by Claude, Gemini and me. See the [Product Spec](PRODUCT_SPEC.md) for details. 

## Features

- **Read-only access** to your Obsidian notes via MCP protocol version **2025-03-26**
- **Strict version negotiation** – the server rejects unsupported `protocolVersion` values with JSON-RPC error **−32001** so clients can gracefully fall back.
- **Performance-optimized** resource listing (10 recent notes) with comprehensive search tools
- **Enhanced UX**: Automatic content inclusion for small result sets (≤3 notes) to reduce back-and-forth
- **Seamless integration** with existing Obsidian LiveSync infrastructure
- **Metadata extraction** including frontmatter, tags, and aliases
- **Content reassembly** for chunked notes
- **Handles encrypted vaults** (if `VAULT_PASSPHRASE` is provided)
- **Docker support** for easy deployment
- **Configurable** via environment variables
- **Modern HTTP transport** with proper session management and rate limiting
- **Structured error handling** with standard JSON-RPC error codes

## Architecture

```
[AI Clients (ChatGPT, Claude)] 
      ↓ (MCP Protocol - stdio/SSE)
[Obsidian MCP Server] 
      ↓ (CouchDB API)
[Your LiveSync CouchDB Instance]
      ↓ (LiveSync Protocol)
[Your Obsidian Vaults]
```

## Prerequisites

- A running Obsidian LiveSync CouchDB instance
- CouchDB credentials with read access to your LiveSync database
- Python 3.10+ (if running locally) or Docker

## Quick Start

### Using Docker (Recommended)

1. **Clone and configure:**
   ```bash
   git clone <this-repo>
   cd obsidian-mcp-server
   cp env.example .env
   ```

2. **Edit `.env` with your settings:**
   ```bash
   COUCHDB_BASE_URL=https://your-couchdb-instance.com/secret-path
   COUCHDB_DATABASE_NAME=your-livesync-db-name
   COUCHDB_USER=your-username
   COUCHDB_PASSWORD=your-password
   ```

3. **Run with Docker Compose:**
   ```bash
   docker-compose up -d
   ```

4. **Test the connection:**
   ```bash
   curl http://localhost:8000/sse
   ```

### Local Development

1. **Install dependencies:**
   ```bash
   pip install -e .
   ```

2. **Set environment variables:**
   ```bash
   export COUCHDB_BASE_URL="https://your-couchdb-instance.com"
   export COUCHDB_DATABASE_NAME="your-db-name"
   export COUCHDB_USER="your-username"
   export COUCHDB_PASSWORD="your-password"
   ```

3. **Run the server:**
   ```bash
   # For stdio transport (direct MCP client connection)
   obsidian-mcp-server --transport stdio
   
   # For HTTP transport (recommended)
   obsidian-mcp-server --transport http --port 8000
   
   # For SSE transport (deprecated)
   obsidian-mcp-server --transport sse --port 8000
   ```

## Setup and Configuration

All configuration is done via environment variables:

| Variable | Required | Default | Description |
|----------|----------|---------|-------------|
| `COUCHDB_BASE_URL` | Yes | - | Full URL to your CouchDB instance |
| `COUCHDB_DATABASE_NAME` | Yes | - | Name of your LiveSync database |
| `COUCHDB_USER` | Yes | - | CouchDB username |
| `COUCHDB_PASSWORD` | Yes | - | CouchDB password |
| `SERVER_PORT` | No | 8000 | Port for SSE transport |
| `USE_PATH_OBFUSCATION` | No | false | Whether LiveSync uses path obfuscation (currently not supported) |
| `VAULT_PASSPHRASE` | No | - | **Optional.** Passphrase for decrypting encrypted Obsidian LiveSync notes. If not set, encrypted notes will not be decrypted. |
| `VAULT_ID` | No | default | Identifier for your vault in URIs |
| `COUCHDB_LIST_LIMIT_FOR_PATH_SEARCH` | No | 500 | Max recent notes to scan when direct path lookup fails or path obfuscation is on. |

### CouchDB URL Format

Your `COUCHDB_BASE_URL` should include any secret paths or authentication prefixes:

- **Direct CouchDB:** `http://localhost:5984`
- **With Caddy proxy:** `https://vault.example.com/secret-path`
- **Self-hosted LiveSync:** `https://your-domain.com/e=your-secret`

### CouchDB Index Creation (Recommended)

To ensure efficient querying of notes, especially for listing and sorting by modification time (`mtime`), it is highly recommended to create a JSON index in your CouchDB LiveSync database. This index helps CouchDB quickly find and sort notes based on their type and modification time.

**Index Definition:**

```json
{
  "index": {
    "fields": ["type", "mtime"]
  },
  "name": "idx-type-mtime-sorted",
  "type": "json"
}
```

**How to Create the Index:**

You can create this index using CouchDB's Fauxton interface or via `curl`.

**Using Fauxton:**
1.  Navigate to your CouchDB instance in your browser (e.g., `http://localhost:5984/_utils/`).
2.  Select your LiveSync database.
3.  Go to "All Documents" -> "New Index" (or similar, depending on Fauxton version; older versions might have it under "Design Documents" -> "New View/Index").
4.  Choose "JSON" as the index type.
5.  Enter the JSON definition above into the editor.
6.  Click "Create Index".

**Using `curl`:**

Replace `YOUR_COUCHDB_URL`, `YOUR_DATABASE_NAME`, `YOUR_USERNAME`, and `YOUR_PASSWORD` with your actual CouchDB details.

```bash
curl -X POST \
  YOUR_COUCHDB_URL/YOUR_DATABASE_NAME/_index \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -u "YOUR_USERNAME:YOUR_PASSWORD" \
  -d '{ \
    "index": { \n      "fields": ["type", "mtime"] \n    }, \n    "name": "idx-type-mtime-sorted", \n    "type": "json" \n  }'
```

**Example with placeholder values:**
```bash
curl -X POST \
  http://localhost:5984/my_livesync_db/_index \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -u "admin:password" \
  -d '{ \
    "index": { \n      "fields": ["type", "mtime"] \n    }, \n    "name": "idx-type-mtime-sorted", \n    "type": "json" \n  }'
```

Creating this index will significantly improve the performance of operations like listing recent notes.

## MCP Client Integration

### Claude Desktop

Add to your Claude Desktop configuration:

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "obsidian": {
      "command": "docker",
      "args": [
        "run", "--rm", "-i",
        "--env-file", "/path/to/your/.env",
        "obsidian-mcp-server",
        "--transport", "stdio"
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

### Custom MCP Client

```python
from mcp import ClientSession
from mcp.client.stdio import stdio_client

# Connect to the server
async with stdio_client() as streams:
    async with ClientSession(streams[0], streams[1]) as session:
        # Initialize the connection
        await session.initialize()
        
        # Get the most recent note with content in one call
        recent_note = await session.call_tool("get_recent_note", {})
        print("Most recent note:", recent_note)
        
        # Search for specific content (auto-includes content for ≤3 results)
        search_results = await session.call_tool("search_notes", {"query": "project", "limit": 3})
        print("Search results with content:", search_results)
        
        # Browse recent notes (auto-includes content for ≤3 results)
        browse_results = await session.call_tool("browse_notes", {"limit": 2})
        print("Recent notes with content:", browse_results)
        
        # List available notes (metadata only, for discovery)
        resources = await session.list_resources()
        
        # Read a specific note if needed
        if resources.resources:
            content = await session.read_resource(resources.resources[0].uri)
            print("Specific note content:", content)
```

## API Reference

The server implements the MCP protocol version **2025-03-26**:

### Resources

#### `resources/list`

Lists up to 10 recent Obsidian notes for performance optimization. For comprehensive note discovery, use the search and browse tools.

**Response:**
```json
{
  "resources": [
    {
      "uri": "mcp-obsidian://vault-id/path/to/note.md",
      "name": "Note Title",
      "description": "Path: path/to/note.md",
      "mimeType": "text/markdown"
    }
  ]
}
```

#### `resources/read`

Reads the content of a specific note.

**Parameters:**
- `uri`: The resource URI from `resources/list` or tool output

**Response:**
```json
{
  "contents": [
    {
      "uri": "mcp-obsidian://vault-id/path/to/note.md",
      "mimeType": "text/markdown",
      "text": "# Note Title\n\nNote content..."
    }
  ]
}
```

### Tools

#### `search_notes`

Search through notes by title, content, or tags with rich metadata and relevance scoring. **Automatically includes full content for small result sets (≤3 notes)** to improve user experience.

**Parameters:**
- `query` (string): Search query (leave empty to browse recent notes)
- `limit` (integer): Maximum results (default: 10, max: 50)
- `include_content` (boolean): Force content inclusion (auto-enabled for ≤3 results)

#### `browse_notes`

Browse recent notes with sorting options. **Automatically includes full content for small result sets (≤3 notes)** to improve user experience.

**Parameters:**
- `limit` (integer): Maximum results (default: 20, max: 50)
- `sort_by` (string): Sort order - "mtime", "ctime", or "path"
- `include_content` (boolean): Force content inclusion (auto-enabled for ≤3 results)

#### `get_recent_note`

Get the most recent note with full content. **Optimized for "show me the latest note" queries** - returns complete note content in a single call.

**Parameters:**
- `sort_by` (string): How to determine "most recent" - "mtime" or "ctime" (default: "mtime")

## Supported Note Features

- ✅ **Frontmatter** - YAML metadata is preserved
- ✅ **Tags** - Both `#hashtags` and frontmatter tags
- ✅ **Aliases** - From frontmatter
- ✅ **Chunked notes** - Automatically reassembled
- ✅ **Markdown content** - Full content with formatting
- ✅ **Encrypted notes** - Decrypted if `VAULT_PASSPHRASE` is set (compatible with `octagonal-wheels`)
- ❌ **Attachments** - Not yet supported
- ❌ **Write operations** - Read-only for safety

## Future Enhancements

- **Custom HTTP API**: Bearer token authentication and custom endpoints for advanced deployment scenarios
- **Write Operations**: Note creation and modification capabilities
- **Real-time Updates**: MCP resource subscriptions and live vault change notifications
- **Advanced Search**: Enhanced querying with date ranges, tag filters, and graph traversal

## Troubleshooting

### Connection Issues

1. **Test CouchDB access:**
   ```bash
   curl -u username:password https://your-couchdb-url/your-database
   ```

2. **Check server logs:**
   ```bash
   docker-compose logs obsidian-mcp-server
   ```

3. **Verify environment variables:**
   ```bash
   docker-compose config
   ```

### Common Problems

- **"Failed to connect to CouchDB"**: Check your URL, credentials, and network access
- **"No notes found"**: Verify your database name and that LiveSync has synced notes
- **"Path obfuscation errors"**: Set `USE_PATH_OBFUSCATION=true` if LiveSync uses it
- **"Decryption failed" or "Content looks encrypted"**: Ensure `VAULT_PASSPHRASE` is correctly set in your `.env` file if your vault uses encryption. If it is set, verify the passphrase is correct. Encrypted content that cannot be decrypted will be marked.

## Security Considerations

- The server provides **read-only** access to your notes
- Use strong API keys and secure your CouchDB credentials
- Consider running behind a reverse proxy with SSL
- Limit network access to the CouchDB instance
- Regularly rotate your API keys

## Development

### Running Tests

```bash
pytest tests/
```

### Code Quality

```bash
ruff check .
pyright .
```

### Building Docker Image

```bash
docker build -t obsidian-mcp-server .
```

## Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch
3. Make your changes
4. Add tests
5. Submit a pull request

## License

MIT License - see LICENSE file for details.

## Related Projects

- [Obsidian LiveSync](https://github.com/vrtmrz/obsidian-livesync)
- [Model Context Protocol](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/)
- [Claude Desktop](https://claude.ai/desktop)

## Error Handling

The server uses structured JSON-RPC error responses with standard error codes:

| Error Code | Meaning | Condition |
|-----------:|---------|-----------|
| `-32001` | Protocol version mismatch | Client requested an unsupported `protocolVersion` |
| `-32002` | Resource not found | Requested note does not exist |
| `-32003` | Rate limit exceeded | Too many requests in a time window |
| `-32099` | Internal server error | Unexpected server-side error |

All errors include a descriptive message and may include additional data in the `data` field.
